Were you stationed and what squadron were you
flying with? I was stationed in Yuban, Thailand. I
was with the 497 squadron in the 8th wing. We were
the night, we had the night mission ordinarily. I
was not on a night mission when I got shot down.
Okay, what type of mission were you flying? I was
flying mid-cap. Okay. And we had diverted from the
strike force to meet some MiGs coming up from the
south, from Hanoi. And we were up there just north
of Hanoi.
In fact, I had started letting down chasing MiGs
when I got shot down. How were you shot down? Was it a
SAM? No, I think it was ground fire. I just felt the
hit. It felt like just a single hit. in the engine
section of the airplane. But it was, it really, you
know, started, all the lights coming on, and I just
started climbing out back toward, back toward
Laos when the controls burned through and I just,
you know, the airplane kind of went ballistic.
Were you injured or wounded? When you were shot
down? Or during your parachute down? No, not
really. I had a little superficial shot on my leg
and on my chin, and that's all. Were you captured
immediately after you parachuted out, or were you
on the ground a couple days, hours? No, I was... I
would think it was probably...
not more than about an hour, but it seemed longer
than that. I was able to, I landed on top of a big
hill, and the people from down below had seen the
chutes, both my chute and my back chute, because
the airplane had crashed before we got down. It was
spinning. It spun in and hit the ground, so that
alerted them to look up and see the chutes. And it
was on a Sunday afternoon, kind of like today. a
real bright, sunshiny day. So, yeah, they saw the
chutes, and they came charging up the hill after
us. But I had landed in a tree. My chute hung up in a
tree, and I was just overhanging a big bluff. But
only momentarily, I jerked on a vine that was
nearby, and the chute released. I landed on a big
limb of a tree, and I unbuckled myself from the...
from the shoot and crawled down the tree and got out
of there and found a place to get myself hidden. And
hopefully to make it till dark so that I could head
west. And I got my compass out and broke a limb so
that I'd know which direction to start off in and
all that stuff. But
they were coming up all around me, looking for me. I
heard, you know, there were dogs and lots of
people. So was it the Viet Cong or villagers? Just,
I think, villagers and militia. Yeah, there was
some militia. Some of the North Vietnam people,
not in Viet Cong, of course, were in the South. This
was up near Hanoi. Okay. And...
They walked right by me, right very close to me, you
know, several times over a period of an hour, two
hours, sometimes, I don't know about that, time
frame. Before
I saw a bare pair of feet. It was just the one person
who came up and I saw the feet stop and they started
backing up. And then they turned and ran. So I knew
that that person had spotted me. All I could see was
the feet, though. And sure enough, of course, it
came back shortly with
some treatment. After you were captured, where
were you first taken? Well,
there was a big crowd. that gathered around me when
they captured me. And there were two people, and
they were civilians up there, but they could speak
a little bit of English. Two men who kind of took
charge, and they, in fact, this one guy fired off a
pistol right close to my head from behind me, and it
really scared me. I thought I was shot, but He was
just warning the crowd and making them get back,
because they had swarmed all over. We're trying to
get all my clothes off. I mean, that's what. But he
wanted to get me moving and out of the crowd so that
he could claim credit for the capture and get
whatever bounty that was offered. I think that was
the reason. And so we took off. And we ran for
several hours. during that afternoon until up
until late well past dark and he secreted me into a
place where they just held me there until they
could turn me over to the army that evening later
that evening they did just that and um along the way
though there were there were people who were
trying to get me away from these two people that had
me sort of like they were jerking and you know and we
were just running and they were kind of fending off
the drought
but at any rate they turned me over to the army that
night and they were really We're rough, you know.
My backseater showed up and they had him at another
place. I hadn't seen him since we bailed out of the
airplane. They put us both in the back of a little
old Jeep type vehicle. And they took our boots off.
We never saw those again. And they took a
shoestring, one of the strings out of our boots and
tied our big toes together along with... They had
us all tied up anyhow, but... That was a
particularly excruciating thing because they
tied them real, real tight. Kind of an odd thing to
do, but that's what they did. So did the Army take
you to a real POW encampment? They spent about
three days just kind of fooling around and keeping
us in one little place or another. during the day
and moving at night kind of secreting us into
Hanoi. We ferried across the river and so on. We
weren't very far from Hanoi from the beginning. I
figure maybe 30, 40 miles to the northwest. But it
took them about three days to get us to the Hanoi
Hilton downtown Hanoi. Did they have any
English-speaking people there to question you or
interrogate you once you got there? Yeah. What
subjects did they try to cover during the
interrogation?
Well, that's hard to explain. They asked military
questions. But the interrogators, my impression
then and later was that You know, they were very
crude. And the questions they asked were things
that were readily available to them. I mean, the
answers to that is in any kind of publication.
There's nothing else that would have been any kind
of a military secret. Just, you know,
what squadron were you in and those kinds of
things. They had rosters in the squadron, so that
wasn't a good thing. But they did it. And, of
course, we and me, all of us, resisted to answering
any questions, regardless of our innocuacy.
And so it was pretty tough because they were, as I
said, it seemed to me that they were just in the
business of... practicing interrogation
procedures and they were going to torture us,
physically torture us, regardless of what the
answers were. The answers were kind of
irrelevant. But boy, they knew how to administer
the torture, and they did that. In my case, they
kept me in the interrogation slash torture room
under really bad conditions for about a week, I
think. I kind of lost track of time, because they
really I took most of it out. And then they finally
took me to a cell in the Hanoi Hilton, a little
corner of the prison called the Mint. There were
three cells back there. And I was the only one back
there. And the cell was about three feet wide by
about six feet long. It wasn't quite as long as I
was. And the bunk was 18 inches wide, and it was just
hard wood, a wooden bench with ankle stocks in it,
with a locker which was manipulated on the outside
of the wall, which was about that big. And they kept
me locked in the stocks. I stayed back there, I
don't know, I think it was about 40 days. See, I had
to be certain. Finally got moved up there to
another part of the prison. Still in solitary,
though. Uh-huh. Sometime
in February, I think. And then I was still there in
solitary for... I told them about 90 days before
they moved me. They moved me to the zoo then.
Uh-huh. How many POWs were in the camp at the time,
or did you have any exposure to other POWs
following your isolation?
Well, where I was, I didn't know that I was in a camp
where there were any more POWs. I was back in the
corner all by myself until I moved up into another
little area of the prison. It wasn't very far away
from the man, but there were other POWs and other
cells in that kind of hallway.
But they went to extremes. measures to be sure that
nobody saw anybody else or nobody communicated.
Although we managed
to do a little of that and got caught at it and got
tortured for it and so on. I read a Reisner's book,
The Passing of the Night, and he talks about, did
y'all communicate with codes, tapping, and...
Uh-huh.
Uh-huh. Uh-huh.
What y'all tried to find out when other prisoners
came in and learned the names, the dog tag numbers?
Oh, yeah, we kept all the names. Uh-huh. It was just
big volumes of communications every day. Uh-huh.
Could you describe, like, a daily life in camp? Is
there such a thing as a routine day? Well...
I don't know if I can remember. Uh... Routinely,
you know, we got up early. The gong went off, I
guess, about daylight. And we'd get up and just
make up, then take the mosquito net down. We had
mosquito nets most of the time in the village. And
just wait around in there until, then usually they
came by with water. I don't know, it was like about
nine o'clock. And
we'd fill up our little, everybody had an
individual little jug for water. You'd get one of
them a day, a quart. They might let you out to go, In
this place where we were, they had a bunch of wells,
hand-dug wells, that you could take a bucket with a
rope and bail out some old muddy water, and you
could wash, dump a bucket of it over your head. So
sometimes the guard, if he got around to it, would
go start doing that and give everybody. He'd take
one group out, put them in this little fenced-in
area around the well, let them have, you know, if
there were three of us, in the case of when I was in
the zoo for about 13 months, I lived with just two
other guys, Red McDaniel and Al Runyon. Then he'd
give us maybe 20 minutes or so in there to get, and
then put us back in the cell and get another group,
you know. But... Theoretically, we weren't
supposed to know that there was anybody else
around anywhere. And then they'd bring a meal that
was, you know, it'd just be a big bucket that was
carried on shoulder poles, or two of them, of soup
and some rice. The soup was just boiled weeds, like
some of that stuff there or something, but... We
call it sewer weed because it grew in a cesspool
area.
And what did you start saying? Go ahead. I was just
going to ask, did you have any physical exercise or
did you exercise in your cells? Most of us
exercised every day in our cells, you know, just
run in place.
doing a little calisthenics and that sort of
thing. You mentioned the sewer soup. With the
conditions and climate, illnesses must have been
common. Did you have any means of trying to prevent
illnesses? Did they allow any medication or
anything like that? Well, from time to time, and
that went up and down with the moods and the
so-called treatment at the time. They would claim
to have medical people attend to people who asked
for it and so on. But it was not anything that I would
ever ask for.
And yeah, we had sicknesses from time to time. We
had a gross epidemic one time of pinkeye.
awfulest mess you've ever seen, and virtually 99%
of everybody in the cells got it. Just went through
like wildfire. And it lasted a week or so, but
everybody's eyes were just unbelievable. Looked
like the whites were like real red egg whites that
were kind of spilling out of your eyelids, you
know, just all swollen. Felt like Your eyes were
full of gravel. And there was a lot of diarrhea, of
course, and dysentery and stuff like that. But
nothing really was ever done about it. Besides
physical exercises, did you have mental
exercises? I talked to some of the POWs, and they
mentally constructed things or mentally read
books. What did you try to do? Oh yeah, it was
fantastic some of the things that people did up
there. I know Nolan Daughtry reconstructed all
the trigonometry
love rhythms.
A couple of times he did that, went through that
exercise. On paper, he got it down because we
would, you know, we'd get toilet paper, real rough
old brown paper, just sheets of it. And we had, we
used all kinds of different things to write with.
We found a little piece of stick and sharpened it on
the concrete and mixed cigarette ashes with,
later on we had Kool-Aid from the packages
sometimes and some sugar. And that sort of thing,
and make something, make an ink that would write
nicely. But so anyhow, a lot of that kind of thing.
People designed houses. And then later on, when we
got into bigger groups, we had a lot of classes. But
just as an example, I spent about three months, a
little over three months in solitary confinement
in the spring of 1980. 1971,
I think. Yeah, it was after the Sante raid, and we
all moved back to Hanoi. They piled us all in the
Hilton again. And it was in that spring. There was
another guy, a friend who was also in solitary in
the Heartbreak Hotel cell block, which is where we
were. And I never smoked. But we always got a little
ration of three cigarettes a day. Usually, I
think. And I always took mine and gave them to the
smokers, you know. But anyhow, when I was in
solitary, I'd take my cigarette ration and wrap it
in a little piece of paper and deposit it in an area.
And they had what we called the shower. There was a
little a faucet in there that dripped a little bit.
And we were allowed in there, though, every day for
a few minutes, or most every day. And I had a way of
communicating with this fellow. And he was an
expert in several subjects. But French was his big
thing. He kind of taught himself French by swiping
French publications when he went to quiz and so on
with the D, and he'd have a similar one in English,
so he'd just look at the different transcript of
the French, and he'd talk himself French. So he was
leaving me French lessons every day, and I left him
my cigarettes. The French lessons... were
written out on toilet paper. He found a little
chunk of lime. They use a lot of lime to whitewash
walls with and that sort of thing. And you could use
that to write with, too. So I studied French for
those three months. I'd like to ask you some
questions about how different events affected
prisoners' treatments.
What about when Nixon started bombing Cambodia?
Was there a change in the treatment, or did you even
know that was going on? Oh, yeah. We got their
version of what was going on in the war all the time.
They'd turn on the loudspeaker at night in the
cells, and it was very difficult to understand.
and most people didn't even bother and didn't even
try to listen. I usually listen some just to try to
read between the lines and see what I could pick up.
But yes, the treatment was up and down a lot and it
did seem to vary with how the war was going and that
sort of thing throughout the years.
But It was hard to predict what their reaction was
going to be. Their propaganda was everything was
going in their favor all the time. During the Paris
peace talks, did y'all find out about those going
on? Oh, yeah. We heard about them. What about when
North Vietnamese sympathizers like Jane Fonda
came over to y'all? I'm sure they used that as heavy
propaganda. Did they let y'all know that she was
coming over? Well,
they used her and all of those kinds of people to the
nth degree. And what they tried to do was set up a
situation to portray what they wanted them to see
to take back to the world. Well, most of us. Never
saw any of those people. All we heard was what we
heard on the box. We'd hear her making her
anti-U.S. statements and that sort of thing. But
she would visit with, they had a few POWs isolated
somewhere away from us that were cooperative with
them. in exchange, I guess, for good treatment or
whatever. And so those are the people that they got
to see. Did you go on the march through Hanoi when
everybody's going back to the Hilton? No, that
occurred before I was shot down. Okay. the famous
march. Now that was just a deal where they came and
got all the prisoners one night and marched them
through the streets to let the people, to incite
the people into hating the American air pirates,
that sort of thing. That was the purpose of that. It
was pretty infamous because it caused a lot of
uproar throughout
the world when they saw films of that, of
the bad treatment of prisoners by the Vietnamese.
The Tet Offensive happened right after your
capture, a month after your capture. Did you hear
anything about that either before or after? Did
you hear any rumors before or after your capture?
Well, not before, I don't think. But the Tet
Offensive was just a part of all the
propaganda-type war news that they routinely put
out. At the time, I knew you could tell that there
indeed was some
heavy fighting and all that in the South. But it
didn't sound extraordinary to me. It just sounded
like routine war news. So I didn't pay a heck of a lot
of attention to it. After you were finally
released and came back to the United States, how
did you handle the transition from being captive
to free again? Was it difficult to realize that you
were actually free at first or just when they told
you the news? No. You know, all the years I was up
there, I always associated with or, you know,
affiliated with the guys who we called the
optimists. We had two different types of people.
Obviously, most of us, I think, were optimists and
felt like we kept kidding ourselves, at least,
that we're going to get out sooner rather than
later. And if Christmas was coming up, well, we'd
say, well, we're going to be home by Christmas, no
problem. And that went on for about six
Christmases, you know. But then if Christmas
didn't make it, well, it was New Year's or Tet or
Easter or the Fourth of July or whatever. But we
always had a target date, you know, and we felt like
one of these days one of them was going to hit and we
weren't going to get the release. So we all had
assured ourselves that we were going to be
released. The other guys... We called the VODs,
the Voices of Doom, and said, you know, we're never
going to get out of here. We're going to be here for
the rest of our lives and so on. But anyhow, so,
yeah, I expected to get released. And, of course, I
was very elated to get released. And I didn't have
any trouble adjusting to being free again. That's
the easiest thing I ever tried to do in my life. The
reason why I asked that, I had read some, not from
the Vietnam War, but from the World War II
prisoners of war that had trouble realizing that
they could actually do things over again without
worrying about repercussions. What was the
impact of being a POW on your career and your life?
Well, other than just being on
hold for about five and a half years. But, you know,
we were, it wasn't totally
lost because we were at a military organization as
POWs and we were operating in a in a very tough,
realistically tough environment. So there was a
lot to be learned from that. And I think many of us,
at least, I believe, benefited a lot from those
years of operating in an organization under those
conditions. So we learned and matured through
that, I think. So all you know. I feel like that had I
not been shot down, that I would have had more
opportunities maybe in my career. But gosh, I
couldn't have possibly had things happen any
better for me career-wise after I was shot down.
During the rest of my active duty career, my
assignments were the greatest. I couldn't have
asked for anything better. than I had. So, you
know, it turned out real well, for me at least. I'd
like to get your opinions on a couple of subjects.
Do you think we should use our troops in a military
conflict without a firm commitment from our
government to win? Like a similar, you know, to
Vietnam? Obviously, you know, that The answer to
that question is pretty obvious. We should not
be involved in something that we're not going to be
committed to win if we're going to expose our
troops to the hazards that they were exposed to
there. But the military is an instrument of
government. And I feel like that our government
ought to have the freedom to use the military arm
for what it's for. And I think it has application in
places like Lebanon and in Central America. Those
kinds of situations are very, very difficult to
handle politically. And if the military can help
out with that, And that's our job, and we ought to do
it. I don't think we ought to get involved in a big,
full-scale war in Lebanon like we did in Vietnam,
certainly. But I think what we're doing over there
is not unreasonable, and it's something that we
need to do and should do to help at least to give...
the Lebanese government the opportunity to get
stabilized.
Okay. In Reiser's book again, he believed that the
longer anybody was in camp, the more
nationalistic and more religious that person
became. Do you agree with that statement? I think
what he's probably saying there is that I think as a
general rule it did apply to most of us up there,
that more patriotic, is that what you mean? Yes,
more patriotic. See, we depended totally on our
country to get us out of there. So we had to believe
in our country if we ever expected to get out of
there, right? And I think that was part of that. Now
there were a few who turned the other way. So I guess
that's the point he was making there. And then, of
course, the other thing that many of us would also
depend on, since we are pretty helpless to do
anything very positive ourselves, we turn to God
to help us. And so I think religion, if you ever had
any, would be more pronounced in a situation like
that because you need every bit of help you can get.
Let me change the tape over.